CLIFFORD ALGEBRA: A VISUAL INTRODUCTION

Clifford Algebra, a.k.a. Geometric Algebra, is a most extraordinary synergistic
confluence of a diverse range of specialized mathematical fields, each with its
own methods and formalisms, all of which find a single unified formalism under
Clifford Algebra. It is a unifying language for mathematics, and a revealing
language for physics.

Unlike the standard vector analysis whose primitives are scalars and vectors
for representing points and lines, Clifford Algebra has additional spatial
primitives for representing plane and volume segments in two and three
dimensions, and it can be extended to any number of higher dimensions by the
same basic scheme, and they do, with remarkably useful properties.

Adding one extra dimension to a total of 4 produces a projective geometry, a
concept not exclusive to Clifford Algebra, but very simply expressed in it,
with some remarkable invariance properties.

Adding two additional dimensions to a total of 5, enables a conformal geometry
with even more extraordinary invariances which are reminiscent of certain
properties of perception.

The truth, or validity of Clifford Algebra is confirmed by Occam’s Razor, it
provides a simpler model of mathematical objects than does vector algebra,
extending naturally from one to two, to three, and higher dimensions all under
the same formalism, with a notational economy that simplifies many mathematical
expressions.

For example Clifford Algebra reduces Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism to
a SINGLE EQUATION, the rest is implicit in the math!

Another feature of Clifford Algebra is that it uses a coordinate-free
representation. Instead of defining motion with respect to an external
coordinate system, motion is described with respect to a coordinate frame
defined on the object in question, which greatly simplifies many models.
Clifford Algebra reveals, for example, that the apparent chirality in
electromagnetism, i.e. the right-hand rule for electric generators, and the
left-hand rule for electric motors, turns out to be actually an artifact of the
math used to describe the world, not a property of the world itself. It turns
out that electromagnetism has no chirality, as revealed by Clifford Algebra.

Clifford Algebra fixes many of the problems inherent in linear algebra, from
the arbitrary distinction between row-vectors and column-vectors, the complex
process of matrix multiplication, the arbitrary arrangement of terms in the
matrix, exemplified most clearly by the complexity of the formula for the
determinant of a matrix, to determine whether the matrix is invertible. In
Clifford Algebra the determinant is the three-dimensional volume of the
parallelopiped spanned by the three row vectors of the matrix, and it becomes
intuitively obvious that the volume goes to zero when the three vectors are
parallel, or when they are all in the same plane. Furthermore, the whole
concept of inversion becomes an explicit spatial inversion, a literal turning
inside-out of a spatial structure.

Clifford Algebra provides a more intuitive model for subatomic particles that
are often modeled with the Pauli matrix, by way of a spatial model that
resembles the particle that it models.

And the way that Clifford Algebra achieves this extraordinary Grand Unification
of mathematics is by expressing algebraic concepts in the form of spatial
operations on spatial structures. Clifford Algebra, a.k.a. Geometric Algebra,
is simultaneously a geometrification of algebra, and also an algebrification of
geometry. We are accustomed to viewing algebra as a manipulation of abstract
symbols back and forth across the equals sign. But do you remember when in
geometry, you learned about a transversal crossing a pair of parallel lines,
and which angles were similar and which were complementary? Your teacher never
had to prove these truths, they merely had to be pointed out, they were
self-evident by inspection. Clifford Algebra does that for algebraic
manipulations, which become natural and intuitive spatial operations on spatial
structures.

Geometry is more primal and explicit than algebra. In Clifford’s own words,

“geometry is the gate of science, and the gate is so low and small that one can
only enter it as a child.”

Clifford algebra invites us to stoop low enough to re-examine some of the most
basic mathematical concepts that we first learned as children, and to see new
spatial and geometrical relations in them.

Why So Obscure?

So if Clifford Algebra is so great, how come you have never heard of it before?
In the first place Clifford died at an early age in an era where there were
several competing algebras being developed, and Clifford Algebra was eclipsed
by Gibb’s Vectors that we all learned in school.

Clifford Algebra was briefly rediscovered by Dirac as a superior expression of
his theory of the electron, although the wider significance was not recognized.
It was rediscovered again  in the 1980’s by David Hestenes who recognized its
general applicability and significance, and David has made a careeor of
promoting “Geometric Algebra”, a more modern update to the original Clifford
Algebra. David Hestenes prefers the term “Geometric Algebra”, which was
actually Clifford’s own choice, because “Clifford Algebra” sound like “just
another algebra” rather than what it really is, which is a discovery of the
fundamental geometrical roots of all of algebra. Besides, Hestenes credits
Hermann Grassmann at least equal to Clifford in the development of Geometric
Algebra. I use the term “Clifford Algebra” for historical context and honoring
a quirky dude, and “Geometric Algebra” when focusing on the modern
reformulations and extensions many of which are due to David Hestenes.

My own interest in Clifford Algebra stems from my own conviction that
mathematics is not a human invention, but more of a discovery of the
foundational principles of thought. Mathematics is an artifact of the human
mind and how it represents spatial reality. The properties of mathematics are
direct evidence for the principles of operation of the human mind.

And since Clifford Algebra provides such a clear view into the fundamental
nature of math, I believe Clifford Algebra to be the Rosetta Stone that reveals
the basic computational and representational principles of spatial perception
and algebraic cognition.

In fact the many regularities found in mathematics, from the periodicity of the
number line, the alternation of even and odd, its mirror symmetry across the
origin, and the polarity reversals of negation and inversion, all suggest a
phasic / cyclic system of representation not unlike the trace on an
oscilloscope in an analog oscillatory circuit, which in turn suggest a wave
based representation in the brain underlying both spatial perception and
mathematical thought.

The history of algebra has been a history of the incremental discovery of an
apparently pre-existing structure. The natural numbers were discovered
independently by all cultures, suggesting that the concept of number is
intuitive, or innate. The concepts of zero and the negative numbers seem to
follow naturally, as if of necessity, and they too were “rediscovered”
independently by different cultures over time.

The closure of circular negation was the first hint of an irregularity.

A problem arose when the solution to certain algebraic equations came out to be
equal to the square root of minus one, something that was a mathematical
impossibility! Rafael Bombelli, and René Descartes (who coined the term
“imaginary” numbers) proposed to name this impossible number i, but that
besides the fact that it squares to negative one, in every other way it was a
regular number. So for example 1 times i = i. i times i (by definition) = -1.
-1 times i must equal -i. And -i times i = -(-1) which brings us back to 1.

MultByICircularRepeated multiplication by i goes round and round in circles,
making periodic excursions into an orthogonal dimension and back again. If you
plot the imaginary dimension as a regular spatial dimension, this suggests that
multiplication by i corresponds to a 90 degree rotation. This is an example of
mathematical closure, a concept we will see again and again in Clifford
Algebra.MultIRotation

Later it was proposed that you could rotate by less than 90 degrees, which
produces a compound number composed of real and imaginary components.

But the real and imaginary dimensions operate by different rules.
Multiplication of real numbers scales their magnitudes in or out from the
origin. But multiplication of the imaginary component performs a rotation, it
is a multiplication that goes round and round instead of in and out.

I don’t know if anyone ever pointed it out to you, but this is VERY STRANGE!

About the same time in the late nineteenth century,  Josiah Willard Gibbs was
playing around with a different kind of compound number, pairs or triplets of
(x,y) or (x,y,z) which can be represented as “directed line segments”, or
vectors. The remarkable thing was that you could add or subtract these compound
numbers in a manner that made a kind of intuitive spatial sense. The question
arose: What happens if you multiply and divide them? Gibbs proposed two kinds
of multiplication, the dot product and the cross product, as we all learned in
school.

Oliver Heaviside used Gibbs vectors to reformulate Maxwell’s equations of
electromagnetism, which did much to cement Gibbs’ vectors position as the
dominant paradigm of vector manipulation. Nevertheless, Tait commented that
Gibbs’ vectors were “a sort of hermaphrodite monster, compounded of the
notations of Hamilton and Grassman”

The dot product was a good idea, and has been incorporated into Clifford
Algebra. But it turns out in retrospect that the cross product was a big
mistake! In the first place it is only really defined for three dimensions, it
does not generalize to two-dimensional vectors without popping out of the page
into the third dimension, and in four dimensions the concept is practically
meaningless because there are so many orthogonal directions. Furthermore,
Gibbs’ vectors can only express scalars and vectors, the only way it could
represent a plane is by its surface normal, which is a vector.

Also the cross product can only rotate by 90 degrees, it cannot rotate through
intermediate angles as do complex numbers.

ParityHandsFinally Gibbs’ algebra has a parity problem, the cross product is
not preserved under reflection, and thus it introduces a chirality to its model
of reality even where there is no chirality in the entity being modeled.

In the meantime over in another branch of mathematics, William Hamilton was
trying to extend complex numbers, with their elegant rotational multiplication,
into three dimensions by proposing three orthogonal imaginary dimensions, i,
j,k,  each of which behaves like the imaginary dimension i, and they interact
with the peculiar circular rule that i x j = k, j x k = i, and k x i = j. Here
again we see another example of mathematical closure, a curious property which
turns out to be very significant.

But Hamilton ran into a problem defining division for these imaginary vectors
because the quotient was not unique. Imaginary vectors A and B, each composed
of (i,j,k) components, multiply meaningfully as in A x B = C, but the inverse,
C / B does not produce a single unique value but a whole range of possible
values. This algebra lacked closure, it only computes one way, you cannot
calculate backwards, as in moving terms back and forth across the equals sign.

After many years of frustration, in a flash of intuition (immortalized by a
plaque on the Broom Bridge in Dublin where the intuition first struck him)
Hamilton realized that he needed one more scalar value to provide a scale for
his complex vectors, so he defined a compound number of the form v = a + bi +
cj + dk, which could be both multiplied and divided, and the quaternion was
born!

All this occurred in the era when the theory of relativity was first emerging,
and GimbalLockHamilton incorporated a relativistic concept in his quaternions
by expressing rotations not with reference to a global x,y,z coordinate frame,
but relative to the current orientation. For example if the orientation of an
aircraft in flight is expressed in “Euler angles” as a triplet of roll, pitch,
and yaw angles in absolute coordinates, there is a problem known as “gimbal
lock” when the aircraft is heading either straight up, or straight down, where
it has no defined yaw angle, or heading. Instead, quaternions employ a
coordinate system that rotates with the aircraft, as perceived by the pilot in
the aircraft, where concepts of “pull up”, “roll left”, and “yaw right” are
meaningful whatever the current orientation of the aircraft.

Hamilton introduced another innovative departure from conventional mathematics
by proposing a CayleyTableQuaternionmultiplication which was not commutative,
i.e. that a x b is not equal to b x a, but neither are they unrelated, but in
fact a x b = -(b x a), where negation corresponds to a reversal in the
direction of rotation, just as negation of a real vector reverses its
orientation. These intriguing concepts were incorporated into Clifford Algebra.

Now a word on the concept of closure, which will turn out to be significant
throughout this presentation. In algebra closure refers to operations on an
algebra that remain within the algebra. For example the natural numbers are
closed under addition because the sum of any two natural numbers is also a
natural number, but they are not closed under subtraction, because if you
subtract enough you can fall right off the end of the natural number scale.

Likewise, the integers are closed under addition, subtraction, and
multiplication, but they are not closed under division because certain
quotients fall between the cracks of the integers. But that is not the only
kind of closure in math.

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

There is closure in our numeral system, where when we run out of digits, we
just put a zero and carry to the next column.

There is closure in an odometer where each wheel flips from 9 to 0, and the
whole register flips from 99999 +1 to 00000.

There is closure in digital registers that also flip from FFFF +1 to 0000.

It’s a computational principle that prevents the calculation from “running off
the edge of the page”, or the register, allowing infinite calculation within a
finite representation.

And there is closure in a multiplication that goes round and round instead of
in and out. It defines a continuous space like a section of the x axis, but it
is a closed dimension, that is finite, but boundless. This will turn out to be
very significant.

GrassmanMeantime Hermann  Grassmann, the inventor of linear algebra, proposed
an alternative to Gibbs’ flawed cross product, in the form of the exterior
product, or wedge product, whereby the wedge product of two vectors defines a
patch of surface whose area is equal to the product of the two vectors, as if
one vector was “swept” along the other (or the other “swept” along the first),
and that surface is within the plane that contains both of the original
vectors.  Just as a vector has magnitude and orientation, but it has no defined
location because it is always at the “origin”, in the same way, the bivector,
or wedge product of two vectors has an orientation and an area, but it has no
location, and neither does it have a shape. It is an oriented area.

These bivectors can be added and subtracted just like regular vectors, and if a
bivector is multiplied WedgeProductby a vector, its surface is “swept” along
that vector in the same manner to define the volume spanned by the three
component vectors, an entity known as a trivector. In other words, this is an
algebra that generalizes to higher dimensions by the same exact principles that
apply at the lower dimensions, and this provides an algebraic entity for
scalars, vectors, bivectors, trivectors, and there is no limit to the number of
dimensions it can be extended to.

Like Hamilton’s quaternions, Grassman’s wedge product is anti-commutative,
whereby a^b = -(b^WedgePropertiesa). And it also incorporated a kind of closure
whereby (in three dimensions) a^b^c makes a trivector, but a^b^c^d collapses
back down to a scalar so as to prevent runaway expansion into ever higher
dimensions.

William Kingdon Clifford was the man who took all the best ideas from previous
work to achieve a single consistent formalism that generalizes to arbitrary
numbers of dimensions. Clifford defined a hierarchy of compound number knows as
“clifs”, or “multivectors”, that range from zero dimensions (scalar) to one
dimension (vector) to two dimensions (bivector), to  three (trivector), and on
upward as far as you care to go. In Clifford Algebra dimensions are referred to
as “grades”, so a scalar is grade zero, a vector is grade 1, etc.

In order to attain the kind of closure seen in quaternions, you have to decide
from the outset how many dimensions you want to use for your problem, so for
example two-dimensional Clifford algebra, or Cl2 wraps around at two dimensions
so as not to protrude out of the plane into the third, whereas Cl3 has closure
in three dimensions, so as not to protrude into the fourth.

Just as a real number can be considered as a complex number with zero imaginary
component, a clif ClifHierarchycan be considered to be composed of higher order
clifs up to the grade of the algebra you choose, even if many of them happen to
have zero coefficient for any particular problem. Clifford Algebra of zero
dimensions, Cl0, is just regular scalar algebra. Clifford Algebra of one
dimension, Cl1, is composed of a scalar and a vector. Cl2 is composed of a
scalar, two vectors, and a bivector. Cl3 is composed of a scalar, three
vectors, three bivectors, and a trivector, and that same scheme extends upward
to higher dimensions by the same principle.

Here we see the hierarchy of Clifford Algebras each with its own characteristic
pattern of components, that appear in numbers corresponding to Pascal’s
triangle. Two-dimensional clifs, Cl2 (the even sub-algebra) are mathematically
isomorphic to complex numbers. Three-dimensional clifs, Cl3 are isomorphic
toBinomialGradesPyramid Pauli matrices used to model subatomic particles. Cl4
is isomorphic to Dirac matrices that model relativistic subatomic particles.

Lets take a closer look at Cl3, Clifford Algebra in three dimensions. There is
a scalar, e, then three orthogonal basis vectors e1, e2, e3, then three
bivectors obtained by pairwise multiplication of the basis vectors, and finally
a trivector defined by the wedge product of all three basis vectors. Each
bivector has a kind of twist that represents a rotation by 90 degrees, for
example bivector e1^e2 represents the right-angled turn from the direction e1
to e2, while its negation, -(e1^e2) rotates by the same angle but in the
opposite direction.

Multiplication of all three basis vectors (e1^e2^e3) produces a
three-dimensional volume segment or trivector, with unit cubed volume. This
trivector has some peculiar properties that represent the scale of the whole
space, it is often called the pseudoscalar of the space, I, it performs the
function of the imaginary number i, but extended into three dimensions.
Multiplication by the trivector represents a 90 degree turn in all three
dimensions. Therefore two such 90 degree turns in each of the three dimensions
results in a total reversal of direction, which is equivalent to a simple
negation, and thus I**2 = -1. Clifford Algebra eliminates the mystery of the
concept of the imaginary number, which becomes a simple rotation by 90 degrees.

For all the variety of different clifs of their various grades, there  are
basically  two  ways that clifs can interact, one is addition/subtraction
(add-traction?) and the other is multiplication/division (multipli-vision?).
Addition represents a kind of summation of independent or successive processes,
whereas multiplication represents a simultaneous modulation of one clif by
another; if either clif is negative the product is negative, but if both are
negative the product is positive again, another manifestation of closure. In
fact analog modulation as in AM radio, or linear gain in amplification, is
defined exactly as analog multiplication.

These two very basic and primal operations can be applied between clifs of any
grade, and they can be applied across different grades, and in every case they
produce results that seem intuitively consistent and reasonable as one might
expect. Addition of scalars and vectors produces a compound scalar and vector
product. Addition of vectors proceeds logically as in Gibbs’ vectors. Bivectors
add to other bivectors to produce a sum bivector.

A scalar times a vector scales the vector in length, and reverses its direction
if negative. A vector times a vector makes a bivector with a twist that turns
from the direction of one to that of the other. A scalar times a bivector
scales its area.  A vector times a bivector, or the product of three vectors
produces a trivector. A vector times a trivector does not  expand to a
quadrivector, but rather it collapses back down to a scalar, thus maintaining
closure in three dimensions.

There is an interesting interaction that occurs across grades seen for example
when a scalar, a non-spatial entity, multiplies a vector which has linear
extent, it changes the spatial length by the magnitude determined by the scalar
value. Likewise, taking the magnitude of a vector v as in ||v|| summarizes the
spatial extent of that spatial vector with a non-spatial scalar magnitude. A
bivector B can also be reduced to a scalar magnitude by taking its magnitude
||B||, which provides an abstract measure of the magnitude of the bivector
which is proportional to its area. These are manifestations of inter-grade
communication, whereby the scalar value can be seen as the most abstract
representation, reducing clifs to a single scalar value that records their
magnitude, and thus scalar algebra can be seen as an abstraction of the
principles of vector algebra, preserving the corresponding magnitudes but
discarding spatial extent.

Lets take a closer look at the product of two vectors. If the two vectors are
parallel, the product collapses to a scalar, yet another manifestation of
closure. A vector times itself collapses to a scalar value one, meaning the
vector is a perfect match to itself. If the vectors are pointing in different
directions, the product includes a bivector with a twist proportional to the
area spanned by the two vectors.

MultVectorTwistWe can see the effects of the twist by multiplying a different
vector by the bivector, which rotates the vector through the same angle as that
between the original vectors. Vector a times bivector c (= a x b) rotates a
through the angle from a to b, which leaves it equal to b. Vector b times
bivector c produces d, rotated from b through the same angle as that between a
and b. As with quaternions,

Since Clifford multiplication is anti-commutative, it is important to
distinguish a*b from b*a, depending on which is the pre-multiplier and which
the post-multiplier. For example a*b is a rotation from a to b, when applied to
a, as in a*(a*b) it rotates a into b, or b = a*(a*b). But the term can be
grouped differently by moving the parentheses, i.e. (a*a)*b. Since a*a = 1,
(a*a)*b = b, which produces the same result, so everything works out right in
the end.

As with Gibbs’ vectors with its distinction between the dot and cross products,
Clifford multiplication, known as the geometric product, is actually a compound
multiplication composed of the sum of a dot product and a wedge product. Like
Gibbs’ vectors, this product captures two aspects of multiplication. The dot
product is a measure of similarity between two vectors, and is a scalar
quantity, whereas the wedge product is a measure of difference, or what you’d
have to do to one to transform it into the other. These are complementary
operations, each one capturing what the other misses. Significantly, both are
spatial projective operations, one is grade-reducing projection, the other is
grade-expanding sweep. The inner product projects one vector onto the other
like casting a shadow, although the shadow is then projected again to a scalar
magnitude. The outer product spans the space between the vectors, a spatial
sweep-like operation that is grade-increasing.

These two operations are not just complementary by design, but by definition.
The dot product is computed as the (average of the) product, a*b, added to its
reverse b*a. Adding a product to its reverse cancels out any component that is
asymmetrical, i.e. the clockwise twist cancels its counter-clockwise reverse,
leaving only the symmetrical component, which is the dot product, or what the
two vectors share in common. It is a little peculiar to call this operation a
“multiplication”, because multiplication is generally thought of as producing a
multiplicity of its multiplicands; it is generally an expansive operation
(unless the multiplicands are less than one), whereas the dot product is more
like a collapse to lower grade, more akin to what we think of as division.

The wedge product is defined as the (average of the) difference between the
product and its reverse, an operation that eliminates the symmetrical
component, but the reversal of the reverse by negation makes them both rotate
in the same direction, whose average preserves only the asymmetrical component,
that represents the difference between the vectors, or how one is twisted from
the other. The dot and wedge products are therefore like symmetry filters that
filter the symmetrical and asymmetrical components of their multiplicands,
respectively.

DotWedgeReduceIncrease A (scalar ^ a vector) makes a vector. A (vector ^ a
vector) makes a bivector. A (bivector ^ a vector) makes a trivector. The wedge
product is a grade-increasing operation. A trivector dot a vector collapses the
dotted dimension. Trivector (P^Q^R) . R collapses the R dimension to make
bivector P^Q. Bivector (P^Q) . Q collapses to P. Vector P dot P collapses to 1.
The dot product therefore seems more akin to division than to multiplication.

It is interesting to note that a scalar * scalar * scalar * scalar is still a
scalar! You need to have at least one spatial dimension to start expanding in
grade. The basis vectors e1 e2 e3 can be thought of as pre-existing
“generators” capable of generating a vector as soon as they are supplied with a
non-zero coefficient.

Here is an animation of the product of the two red vectors as one rotates
around the other, showing the complementarity of the dot and wedge products.
(The dot product is depicted here as a vertical vector, to show its magnitude,
although it is actually supposed to be a scalar quantity) Note the several
polarity reversals of both the dot and wedge products as as the vectors go
around, along with a reversal in the rotational orientation, or “twist” of the
bivector.

Clifford Vectors Analog Electronics Analogy

This series of phase reversals, and the concept of a generator, is highly
suggestive of a cyclic phasic representation not unlike the trace on an
oscilloscope, as demonstrated in the above op-amp circuit. A sawtooth waveform
generator at the upper-left generates the sawtooth wave plotted on the lower
left, which is split into x and y streams each of which can be modulated by the
potentiometers toward the right to produce X and Y traces whose amplitude can
be modulated (and reversed) with the X and Y sliders to the right, plotted at
the lower center of the screen. The X and Y signals are then plotted against
each other at the lower right, showing a “flying spot” starting at the origin
and flying cyclically toward the upper-right, tracing out the vector
represented by the oscillations in the system. If you reverse the X slider the
vector rotates into the second quadrant. If you then reverse the Y slider the
vector rotates into the third quadrant, if you reverse the X slider back to
positive the vector rotates into the fourth quadrant, and if you bring Y back
to positive the vector returns to the first quadrant. The sawtooth waves that
control the “flying spot” that traces out the vector correspond to the basis
vectors e1 and e2, which are constantly cycling, but only produce a trace when
their coefficient is non-zero.

The basic principles behind Clifford Algebra appear rather simple, which makes
it all the more wonderous what complex computations they can achieve.

Clifford Algebra has been characterized as a “reflection algebra” because its
most primal operation, vector multiplication, seems to mimic a simple
reflection. If red vector c = b*a*b is the product of b times (a*b), it is a
reflection of a through b, because the angle from c to b is the same as the
angle from b to a. (We are dealing here with unit vectors so as to avoid any
additional scaling, resulting in pure rotation)

This Clifford Vector Multiplication Animation shows how the reflection of a in
b occurs like a reflection in a plane surface normal to vector b.

The rich and powerful operation of that rotational Clifford multiplication can
be reduced to a simple reflection!

This rotational multiplication by reflection is reminiscent of a phenomenon in
nonlinear optics when two laser beams cross in space, as shown for beams B1 and
B2 above. An interference pattern appears through the zone of their
intersection due to constructive and destructive interference. If modeled in a
Reciprocal Lattice representation where each beam is represented by a vector,
as shown by K1 and K2 in C above, the emerging interference pattern can itself
be described as the difference vector K2 – K1 that closes the wave vector
diagram.

If the crossing occurs in empty space it has no effect on anything else.
However if the crossing takes place in the transparent volume of a nonlinear
optical materal (and most any glass goes nonlinear with sufficient amplitude)
the interference pattern warps the glass in the shape of the pattern, by the
optical Kerr effect, which defines parallel planes of alternating refractive
index in the glass.

This reified interference pattern in turn is able to deflect, or reflect a
third beam, B3 above, producing a fourth reflected beam B4 whose direction and
magnitude can also be computed as the vector that closes the wave vector
diagram in the reciprocal lattice representation in B above, i.e. such that
K1+K2+K3+K4 = 0. This is the principle behind phase conjugation, a mechanism by
which the angle between two vectors controls the reflection of a third,
reminiscent of the bivector and its effect on vectors that are multiplied with
it.

The power of the geometric product is demonstrated most dramatically in the
example of Maxwell’s four Equations of Electromagnetism. These describe the
curl of electric and magnetic fields using cross-product terms, and the
divergence of the electric and magnetic fields using dot product terms.

The magnetic field must be described by a “pseudo-vector” field because unlike
a plain vector, as with the electric field, the magnetic field cannot survive
an “improper rotation” i.e. a reflection without requiring an additional change
of sign. (The mirror image of your right hand demonstrating the right-hand rule
is your left hand, but that demonstrates a left-hand rule!)

In Clifford Algebra these four equations reduce to a single equation, the rest
is implicit in the math! The magnetic field is described by a bivector, which
has the sign-flipping automatically built-in. The geometric product product
automatically multiplies the wedge product terms for the curl, and the dot
product terms for divergence, all in a single equation.

Algebraic / Spatial Concepts

There are a number of algebraic concepts, some of which are familiar in scalar
algebra, that are revealed by Clifford Algebra to be actually algebraic /
spatial concepts. For example the reflection of a vector about the origin is
equivalent to negation. Reflection is negation! Clifford Algebra is a
reflection algebra. Rotation by 180 degrees is also a negation! Rotation by 90
degrees is equivalent to multiplication by i, the square root of minus one,
because two of those multiplications reverse the direction which is also
negation. This removes the mystery behind that peculiar notion of the square
root of minus one, and reveals it to be a simple rotation. Furthermore,
negation is also rotational reversal, thus drawing an equivalence between the
open translational dimensions and the closed circular dimensions. This is very
strange! Its profound significance will be discussed below.

This is simultaneously an algebrification of geometry, and the geometrification
of algebra, it suggest a fundamentally spatial computational mechanism behind
the principles of algebra. The similarity between numbers arrayed along the
number line, and the lengths of corresponding vectors from the origin, is no
mere coincidence, it reveals spatial vectors as the true basis underlying even
scalar algebra.

It is a peculiar characteristic of Clifford Algebra that angles are not
represented directly as angles, expressed in degrees or radians, but rather,
angles are expressed by their X and Y components, a rectilinear coordinate
system for expressing angles. This is significant because it makes a connection
between the egocentric “dartboard” polar coordinate system where the origin is
a special unique place, and the allocentric “city-block” Cartesian coordinate
system in which every point is identical, and the origin is no longer special.
Clifford algebra expresses one in terms of the other, thus mapping them to each
other.

Another curious algebraic / spatial concept is the Dual, indicated by a
superscript* asterisk. Every Clifford Algebra entity has its “orthogonal
complement”, like the particle and its antiparticle, or the yin and its yang.
For example the dual of a vector is a bivector, the wedge product of a pair of
vectors that are orthogonal to it, and the dual of the bivector is its normal
vector. The area of the bivector that is the dual of a vector is proportional
to the magnitude of the vector.

The dual of a scalar, which has no spatial extent, is the pseudoscalar, which
has all the spatial extent, and the dual of the pseudoscalar is a scalar.

The dual of a clif is easy to calculate, you just divide by the pseudoscalar,
and this is a consequence of closure, because a vector times itself collapses
to a scalar, so multiplying by the pseudoscalar collapses all vectors that are
non-zero, leaving only those that were zero to begin with. It flips the whole
pattern into its opposite, and the opposite of the opposite is back again to
the apposite, the thing you began with in the first place.

Another algebraic / spatial concept is the reverse. For example the reverse of
a*b is b*a. The reverse of a*b*c*d is d*c*b*a. Its like multiplying yourself
back out again in the reverse sequence than the way you got in. We have already
seen the utility of the reverse in defining the dot product and the wedge
product by symmetry and anti-symmetry respectively.

Another interesting concept is the Nullspace, defined for a Clif as the set of
all vectors that evaluate to zero for some function. For example the Inner
Product Nullspace (IPNS) of a vector v is the set of all vectors whose dot
product with v = 0, which consists of the plane that is orthogonal to v. This
is in contrast to the dual of that same vector, which is a bivector normal to
the vector, i.e. within the plane of the IPNS, but with an area proportional to
the length of the vector, whereas the IPNS of a vector is a plane that extends
to infinity. This is a generalization of the outer product to infinity. (Note
that the NULL in the nullspace is a negation, thus the Inner Product NullSpace
resembles an OUTER product, while the Outer Product NullSpace resembles an
INNER product)

The Outer Product Nullspace (OPNS) of a vector is the set of vectors whose
outer product is zero, i.e. the infinite line within which the finite vector is
embedded. Again, this contrasts with the dual of a bivector which is a vector
whose length is proportional to the area, whereas the OPNS of a bivector is a
line that stretches to infinity in opposite directions.

These are all examples of the principle of reification, extrapolating a given
local pattern outward to infinity by the same rules. A vector expands to an
infinite line, a bivector surface segment expands to an infinite plane. It is
easy enough to comprehend and to describe this kind of reification, but very
hard to implement in any kind of finite mechanism, except by a parallel analog
spatial principle like an optical mirror system.

Projections are so fundamental to Clifford Algebra that they can be expressed
very simply using dot and wedge products.

For example a vector a can be decomposed into parallel and perpendicular
components to a plane defined by bivector B, where the parallel component, “a
par B” = a.B/B, whereas the perpendicular component “a perp B” = a^B/B. David
Hestenes calls this powerful pair of complementary concepts “projection” and
“rejection”.

We have seen how reflections can be performed by multiplication. Reflections
can also be computed from simple projections. For example the reflection of
vector a in bivector U above can be calculated as the component parallel to the
plane minus the component perpendicular to it, i.e. “par – perp”.

Rotation by reflection produces a mirror-image reversal in the reflection, as
does a normal mirror. This is not readily apparent in the case of vectors due
to their one-dimensional symmetry, but is of significance for higher order
clifs.

A more general concept of rotation is derived by two reflections through two
vectors, which flips the reflection back again, resulting in a rotation without
flipping. For example vector “bab” which is (b*a*b) is a reflection of vector a
through b, and similarly, the reflection of bab on vector c is computed as
c*bab*c, a double reflection “sandwich”

This concept extends naturally into 3-D. For example vector a is reflected
through n by the rotation n*a*n, (start with n, then rotate through the angle
from a to n) and then that vector “nan” is reflected through another vector m,
resulting in a final product of m*nan*m, or m*n*a*n*m.

Another algebraic / spatial concept  is the concept of the “meet” and the
“join” between two Clifs corresponds to the Intersection and Union of the
component entities. These too have simple formulas in Clifford Algebra.

Now we come to the concept of inversion, 1/x, a concept you learned so long ago
that you probably can’t even remember learning it, but in all the time since
then, nobody ever pointed out to you that it is a conceptual impossibility!
Supposedly for every value x that can range from one to INFINITY, there is a
reciprocal value 1/x that is confined to the interval between zero and one.
That suggests a one-to-one mapping from an infinite range to a finite range
between zero and unity!

Inverse2 Inverse4

This is demonstrated here by plotting in red the reciprocal function between
zero and one, i.e. the number whose inverse maps to it. For example ½ maps to
2, 1/3 maps to 3, ¼ maps to 4, and so forth, showing how the inverse function
(the red plot line between zero and one) is like a conformal reflection of the
number line (the black line plotted from one towards infinity) reflected
through the unit boundary although squashed by a conformal mapping.

nlr NumLinRef

 

Its as if you took the number line from one to infinity, made a mirror-image
reflection of it, take the reciprocal of that, Then we effectively put a
bracket BEYOND INFINITY (the arrow coming in from the left) and squash the
reflection back down to a finite range so that the entire reflection is
squashed into the unit interval. This is a completely impossible operation
because it pretends that it is possible to place a bracket beyond infinity and
to squash infinity back to “finity”, a finite range. And on our familiar number
line the same operation is done in the negative direction too. This creates a
double mirror image of the whole number line from negative to positive infinity
excluding the unit radius, all packed within the finite range of the unit
radius from -1 to +1. This is an extraordinary paradoxical impossibility, but
it is the impossibility that brings closure to multiplication, that offers a
reciprocal to multiplication as if every positive and negative number had a
reciprocal value that falls between positive and negative unity, and the fact
that every number has its reciprocal is what makes it possible to multiply and
divide both sides across the equals sign, to calculate forward to compute
implications, as well as backward to impute original causes.

This incredible “impossible” reciprocal function was already present in scalar
algebra that we learned in grade school. What Clifford Algebra adds to this
concept is a circular symmetry, like a set of number lines rotated through all
orientations, tracing a unit-radius circle at the center, within which is a
conformal reflection of the infinite surrounding space. For every (x,y) point
in two-dimensional space that falls on some radial ray from the origin, there
is a reciprocal point that falls on the same ray in the same direction from the
origin, but with radial distance from the origin that is the reciprocal of the
distance to the point, just as occurs on the regular number line itself. If the
original point is greater than unity, then its reciprocal is always less than
unity, and vice-versa, because by symmetry, the reciprocal of a reciprocal gets
back to itself. Clifford Algebra generalizes the algebra on the familiar number
line to an algebra that occurs symmetrically at all orientations equally, and
thus merges algebra with its parent geometry to define an algebra of space. And
this same concept extends naturally into three dimensions and higher, where the
central unit-radius sphere, or hyper-sphere, contains within it a reciprocal
inverse conformal reflection of the entire space outside the sphere squashed
into a finite spherical volume.

Play around with MathForum.org‘s Inversion of A Point Demo and observe that
when point x and its inverse point 1/x are close to the circumference of the
unit circle, they are mirror-reflections of each other across the unit circle,
showing how multiplication is reflection near the unit boundary. When you slide
point x  off outward towards infinity, its reciprocal point 1/x begins to
approach zero, but never gets there unless you could slide x all the way out to
infinity! Now if you slide x back from infinity and make it cross the unit
circle, it changes place with its reciprocal doppelgänger like Alice changing
places with her own reflection in a mirror, and now as  x approaches the
central origin, its reciprocal shoots off towards infinity. The difference this
time is that you can move point x exactly to zero, which means that its
reciprocal must have arrived at actual infinity, although no computer display
could possibly show it there, we just stop accounting for it when it runs off
the edge of our screen.

Alexandre Duret’s photo art Stereographic Projection gives an impression of how
this idea would look extend into three dimensions, with a spherical boundary at
a unit distance from some origin, containing an inverse conformal reflection of
the surrounding world.  See the tall tower at 2 o’clock, blocking the sun, and
its inverse reflection within the unit radius in the 2 o’clock direction, with
a peculiar inversion: the tower itself extends outward from the center above
its base (“up” is “outward”). In the reflection the tower extends inward from
the base toward the center, (i.e. “up” is now “inward”) because in the inverse
world, the direction towards the circumference of the circle is proximal,
whereas the direction towards the center of the circle is distal, with the
bizarre peculiarity that the singular point at the very center of the picture
represents infinity in all directions! This is a very strange singular
structure to be found at the very core of our number system! It is not there by
accident. It provides a lever balance across the unit boundary between a value
x and its reciprocal 1/x.

The inverse function embodies an assumption that all of infinity in every
direction can be packaged as its reciprocal within a finite unitary range, the
finite range from zero to one reflects the entire world from one to infinity.
And even more outrageous to common sense, is the fact that although every
direction in space points outward towards its own unique infinity in that
direction, in the reciprocal reflection they all map to a single central point,
which represents not only infinity, but all of the infinities in all directions
simultaneously!

In my next post I will show how the impossibility of the inverse function
suggests that the number line should not be conceived as infinite, but merely a
pseudo-infinity that represents the entire range from one to infinity, all
squashed into a finite range, a mirror-image of its conformal reflection, as
suggested in non-euclidean geometries.

And of course the same thing would be required in the negative direction. That
would render the point-for-point mapping between x and its inverse 1/x  no
longer an impossible paradox, but now perfectly possible, because it is now a
point-for-point mapping from a finite range to another finite range. The
existence of the paradox of the inverse function is evidence that our true
representation of mathematics in our mind does not use a representation that
extends to infinity (how could it?) but it simulates infinity within a finite
representation that does not incorporate a paradoxical impossibility. 

In fact this much should have been obvious by inspection of our world of
perceptual experience, which itself seems to be trapped in some kind of
egocentric warp. The sides of a long straight road converge to a point on the
horizon before us, and if we turn around, they converge to a point back there
too! And yet they appear to be straight and parallel and equidistant throughout
their length. This reveals a conformal warp in our very perception of space,
such that lines that curve along with the warp are by definition “straight” in
that space, and they terminate at (pseudo-) “infinity” at either end. The dome
of the sky marks the outer boundary of our perceptual bubble, the maximal
extent of our spatial experience, no matter how large a space we are exposed
to.

The reason for the warp in our perceptual bubble is clearly to allow a finite
spatial representation to depict a practically infinite surrounding space. This
is yet another manifestation of closure, with remarkable similarities to the
true nature of the number line as revealed by Clifford Algebra.

In my next posting I will show how the similarity with perception does not end
there, and that the conformal mapping in Geometric Algebra suggests a similar
inversion as a part of perception, except extended out into three dimensions,
and the purpose of that inverse representation is the same purpose it serves in
mathematics, it reveals certain regularities and symmetries that are not
readily apparent in the non-inverse world.

The history of algebra has been the history of an incremental discovery of an
evidently pre-existing structure.  Clifford Algebra has turned out to be the
lynchpin that shows how all the previous discoveries are  interrelated within a
single self-consistent scheme whose laws operate the same in all directions.
It is the very simplicity and generality of Clifford Algebra that confirms its
“truth”. But truth to what? What is it that mathematics represents? What must
it remain true to? This gets to the question of, as Lakoff and Núñez (2000)
called it in the title of their book, “Where Mathematics Comes From“. If
algebra is the discovery of a pre-existing structure, then what is that
structure and where is it located? Plato and his many modern adherents believe
mathematics to be an objective eternal Truth that exists independently of human
minds, although it is only accessible through the human mind. It is true that
mathematics is not a human invention, but more of a discovery, and thus has
objective existence in that sense. But to declare the magnificent edifice of
Mathematics to inhabit an orthogonal dimension that is inaccessible to
scientific scrutiny, is a hypothesis that cannot in principle be falsified, and
thus, it is not a scientific hypothesis but more of a belief, for those who are
inclined to believe it.  I demand a more scientifically sound falsifiable
hypothesis for the ultimate nature of mathematics that gives it objective
existence in the universe known to science. I agree with Lakoff and Núñez that
mathematics is an artifact of how our mind makes sense of reality, and that
therefore mathematics has physical existence or instantiation within the human
brain. Our view of the world is not direct, we see the world indirectly,
through a representation, or model of the world constructed in our brain, and
that model is painted out in the geometric primitives of points and lines and
planes, which are the elemental features of perception, and those geometric
primitives correspond closely to the algebra which was ultimately derived from
them. Since Clifford Algebra offers such a clear view of the essential
principles of mathematics, it thereby also offers a clear view of the
principles of visual perception and the way we conceptualize shapes in space,
revealing algebra to be at the root of it a spatial process of spatial
operations that operate on spatial structures. The scalar algebra that we learn
first in school is an abstraction of the vector algebra that underlies it.

The periodicity of the number line, the alternation between even and odd, the
concepts of negation and inversion, are all strongly suggestive of a phasic
cyclic oscillatory phenomenon which must ultimately reside in the brain. The
fact that Clifford Algebra reveals all of algebra to be a spatial phenomenon at
the root of it, suggests that the computational processes of the human brain
are themselves spatial in nature, like the computational operations of
nonlinear optics and phase conjugation which they resemble, where spatial waves
interact with other waves to produce modulated waves. The fact that Clifford
algebra is particularly good at modeling phasic / cyclic phenomena such as the
“spin” of elementary particles, all suggests that the human brain operates with
a spatial representation based on cyclic oscillations and standing waves in the
brain, which just happens to be similar to the cyclic resonances of subatomic
particles. The equivalence found in Clifford Algebra between the linear and
rotational domains, how negation maps also to rotational reversal, and
translation along a linear axis maps to angular rotation about the origin, is
surely further evidence for a wave based  principle of computation in the
brain. Light waves come in the form of transverse waves that oscillate
vertically or horizontally, but it also manifests in the form of rotational
oscillations whereby the photon spirals either clockwise or counter-clockwise
as it travels through space. It is the essential equivalence between linear and
rotational oscillations that reflects their equivalence in Clifford Algebra.

The many manifestations of closure seen in different forms throughout algebra
suggests a computational principle that makes optimal use of a finite
representational resource, like the odometer whose individual dials each form
closed loops, as does the odometer as a whole, and thus the mechanism never
“runs off the end”, it just wraps around again. This is not a strategy for an
accurate representation of an effectively infinite universe, as we discover
whenever our odometer “rolls over” to zero, but rather it is a strategy for a
wise design of a limited representational resource. It is an artifact of the
computational mechanism of our numerical mind with which we represent the
world, not a property of the world itself. But there is also a certain
invariance to a rotational representation that resolves the problem of the
“infinities” found at both ends of every number line. The equivalence between
linear and rotational dimensions suggests that our mind never actually uses
linear dimensions like the X axis, but approximates them in a circular
dimension to avoid the problem of “infinities”.

This entire analysis of Clifford Algebra was based on my own foundational
assumption that mathematics is not a human invention, but more of a discovery
of the essential principles of computation in the brain. If this hypothesis is
correct, then it should be possible to reverse engineer the principles of
operation of the brain with guidance from the properties of mathematics as
revealed through Clifford Algebra. I propose the next step in investigating the
computational principles of perception would be to devise oscillatory circuits
such as this Clifford Vectors Analog Electronics Analogy, to see what is
possible using waves as a principle of spatial representation and computation.
When we discover what kinds of things can be computed using a cyclic / phasic
analog system built to emulate Clifford Algebra, only then will we be ready to
hypothesize the computational function of the oscillations found in the brain.

This concludes my introduction to Clifford Algebra, but this is by no means the
end of the story! This narrative continues with the story of Geometric Algebra,
the modern reformulations and some extraordinary extensions to Clifford’s and
Grassman’s work, largely due to David Hestenes, that reveal the true potential
of Clifford Algebra and its intimate connection with perception. David Hestenes
saw fit to rename Clifford Algebra to Geometric Algebra, which it turns out was
Clifford’s own choice, because Hestenes wanted to emphasize the fact that
Clifford Algebra is not just another algebra, but a radical discovery of the
true roots of all algebras, and those roots are geometric in nature.
